Onboarding: Beginner lecture (+ runnable Mesh examples) (#1916)
cardano-foundation/developer-portal: docs/developers/onboarding/lectures/beginner/3-tokens-fungible-and-nfts.mdx

Reviewer: This may be going too fast. Not sure if to reduce the scope or explain in more detail what's going on

Author: I added more stuff, it is more complete now. Let me know if you want to add more information.

---
title: "Tokens: fungible & NFTs"
sidebar_label: "Tokens: fungible & NFTs"
description: "How Cardano creates custom assets natively, and the difference between fungible tokens and NFTs."
---

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";
import CodeBlock from "@theme/CodeBlock";
import extractRegion from "@site/src/utils/extractRegion";
import MintToken from "!!raw-loader!@site/examples/onboarding/lectures/mesh/src/mint-token.ts";

# Tokens: fungible & NFTs

So far everything has been about ADA. But a UTxO (one of those sealed bags) can also hold **custom tokens** you create, and on Cardano that's simpler than on most chains.

> Tokens on Cardano are **native**: the ledger tracks your custom asset right alongside ADA, and moving it around needs **no smart contract**. Every token has a **policy ID** (who's allowed to create it) and an **asset name** (its label, like `GOLD`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tokens on Cardano are **native**: the ledger tracks your custom asset right alongside ADA, and moving it around needs **no smart contract**. Every token has a **policy ID** (rules to create or destroy it) and an **asset name** (its label, like `GOLD`).
```

There are two kinds, and you already know the difference from real life:

- **Fungible tokens** are **interchangeable**, like **dollar bills**, every unit is identical. You make one by minting a quantity greater than 1. Good for currencies, points, in-game gold.
- **NFTs (non-fungible tokens)** are **unique**, like a **numbered ticket** or a piece of art. An NFT is just a token with a quantity of **1**, under a policy that can never mint it again.

That's the whole distinction: **fungible = many identical units; NFT = a single unique unit.**

## What's a policy ID?

We keep mentioning the **policy ID**, so let's pin it down. Behind every token is a **minting policy**: the rule that decides who may create (or destroy) that token, and under what conditions. The **policy ID** is the _hash_ of that policy, a 56-character fingerprint.

It matters for two reasons:

- **It's a unique namespace.** Your `GOLD` and someone else's `GOLD` never clash, because they sit under different policy IDs. A token's real, full identity is always **policy ID + asset name** together, not the name alone.

> - **It fixes the rules forever.** The simplest policy says "only the holder of this key may mint." An NFT usually uses a policy that can **only ever mint once** (often locked after a deadline), and that's exactly what makes it provably one-of-a-kind.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **It fixes the rules forever.** The simplest policy says "only the holder of this key may mint." An NFT usually uses a policy that can **mint only one token once** (we'll learn how in future lectures), and that's exactly what makes it provably one-of-a-kind.
```

> So when the explorer shows a token, the policy ID tells you _which_ asset it truly is, and hints at what its creator is allowed to do next.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Confusing because it clashes with previous statements. policyID + asset name tells you which asset it truly is

## Try it

> - **See one:** open the **[Cardano explorer for Preview](https://explorer.cardano.org/preview)**, search your address, and check for any assets besides ADA, each shows its policy ID, name, and quantity.

Reviewer: We can't be sure they'll have one asset (maybe they skipped the tutorial). Point them to a fixed Tx in the past that already has one or two tokens.

- **Make one:** mint your own token right below, or in the **[Tutorial](/docs/developers/onboarding/tutorial/overview)**, where you mint GOLD and SILVER. Afterward, look your address up on the explorer and see your new tokens sitting next to your ADA.

## See it in code

Let's mint one. This creates **100 GOLD** under the simplest possible policy, a native script that only your wallet's key can use, and the new tokens land back in your wallet. No smart contract and no collateral, just the connected wallet. Notice how the **policy ID** falls out of hashing that policy:

<Tabs groupId="offchain">
<TabItem value="mesh" label="Mesh" default>

> <CodeBlock language="ts" title="mint-token.ts">

Reviewer: Not sure if we can skip Native Scripts like that. It looks like magic. We should at least explain how this works

Author: I have created a new page explaining native scripts, and it is well organised now.
